I mean we're back on Washington journal
with Anna Nelson from American
University who served on the JFK Review
Board established by the JFK Records Act
of 1992 good morning good morning thank
you for joining us so how and why was
the review board set up what did you do
well Congress passed a statute in 1992
largely as a result of the Oliver Stone
movie people had suspected the Warren
Commission for years and years and years
of hiding something and then when the
movie came out large numbers of people
felt that their the idea of conspiracy
had been truly proven by the movie so
Congress some members of Congress
feeling that they didn't really like the
idea of having the government suspected
of being part of a conspiracy decided
that perhaps it was time to not
investigate but release the documents we
were not an investigating committee we
did not come to a decision on any way of
who killed the president it was our job
to open every record we could find so
that a large number of people can go use
those records and make up their own mind
we were chosen by the president under
the provisions of the statute and the
Congress suggested to the president that
we be professionals who reckoned we to
historical organizations the two major
historical organizations in the country
the American Historical Association and
the organization of American Historians
which is just Americanists the arc of
archival organization the Society of
American archivists and then the
National Bar Association one of our
members had to be a lawyer and one of
our members was chosen by the president
who also chose a historian so there were
four historians and a lawyer now I
noticed on the cover of the report that
you all issued the statement all
government records concerning the
assassination of President John F
Kennedy
Kennedy should carry a presumption of
immediate disclosure is that a
conclusion you came to or were those
your marching orders those were our
marching orders and but was the final
statement in the in our nominating
committee we had we were we were picked
by the president but we had to be
approved by the Senate government
affairs committee and those were the
last words given to us the statute also
says that we must proceed on a
presumption of openness
none of these documents are closed
forever the they're closed for 25 years
which means in 2017 unless the agencies
come back and protest they are open even
the ones that we decided for various
reasons should be closed for a while
largely those were imposing on privacy
rules and threatening we felt certain
release of certain names were threatened
officials and and there were some
technical operations that we had to
cover we were dealing with very
high-level records and we were dealing
with not only the Central Intelligence
Agency in the and the FBI but also the
National Security Agency which is one of
our most secretive agencies and many
other government agencies well our calls
have already started coming in we're
gonna let you we've brought some visual
aids to show us the daunting nature of
the task facing you but first let's take
our first caller the moderate line from
Columbia South Carolina good morning
good morning yes I'd like to know if Lee
Harvey Oswald did not kill JFK who did
well you're asking a question of who did
it and that's not what we were supposed
to do what we did do was to look into
every corner for information on Lee
Harvey Oswald and we found a lot of it
and we found a lot that had not been
released one of these documents for
example that one over there to Adair was
left was a document that we found that
was totally black and when it was
cleared for being open
want to get the other one it just it
said something we didn't know about Lee
Harvey Oswald that basically he had
tried to go to Switzerland on his way to
the Soviet Union
this was the kind of work we did we did
not decide on who killed the president
this report that you issued is this
available to the public it is not
available to public in that forum
because that actually is a copy that we
had printed the GPO the Government
Printing Office is going to complete the
report that we picked a nicer cover of
reports as soon as they can and I think
it probably another week or two they'll
be available for GPO and they can be
ordered from them unfortunately our
board is now out of business so you have
to get them from the government however
I will say that the entire report is on
a couple of websites one of them is the
organization of american historian
websites the washington post considered
putting it on i don't know if they ever
concluded to do it and it may be on the
National Archives website at some point
so we prepared a great many CDs I guess
they are for websites and with the
assumption that people who were not
close to a GP a government printing
office store or someone who didn't want
to pay the price would be able to read
the report caller from Graham North
Carolina or our conservative line good
morning yes good morning I was wondering
if the Commission or the committee there
has received any photographs or any
other documentation from the American
public
since the assassination to influence the
report and I was wondering if the new
technology has made any inroads and
finding out some information about the
assassination that wasn't revealed or
reported in the past
thank you actually that we did use some
new technology
we were graciously very graciously codec
offered without my pay to enhance the
autopsy records now those records are
still in the possession of the County
Family but we felt like we were the last
opportunity to clear up some of these
issues and that perhaps ultimately in
the far distant future they would be
available they are always they always
have been available to pathologists and
other people who would petition to see
them and so we did enhance those autopsy
records to the point where they are much
clearer we also assured that the saputo
film was digitalized properly and not
just commercially and we received a
number of films and photographs one was
taken by the president's friend Dave
powers who was in a car behind the
president during the ride to Dealey
Plaza unfortunately his film ran out
before the assassination but the film is
very interesting anyway because it does
show the motorcade and it shows it's
really kind of tragic it shows a very
happy cheerful president and mrs.
Kennedy and it's a valuable film then we
also achieve obtained many outtakes from
news people who had published you know
the newspapers don't take every single
picture that you that the photographer
takes and many of them had saved those
outtakes and we obtained a number of
those so we have it I guess we have
enhanced the greatly the visual side we
made a plea for film and photographs and
we did get some that had been put away
on our liberal I'm from Chicago Illinois
good morning good morning how are you
fine thank you my question is now that
you've done the research and opened up
these areas was what was the most
surprising thing you found and what is
the next step well I suppose the next
step is for people who are truly
interested in those people who have in
fact spent many many hours and days and
months and years of their lives
investigating assassination to now go to
the National Archives their finding aid
or our finding aid for these documents
is again on the web and I think that's
the next step the next step has to go
come from historians and researchers in
terms of what we found that was most
surprising I think the first thing was
the sheer number of documents four
million pages are now in the archives
now we did not look at all of that we
were instructed only to look at those
documents but the agencies were covering
up either in part or in whole and so our
job was to look at documents that that
looked like the black document over here
and open them up and this we did and we
were responsible for about sixty
thousand pages that had not been opened
being opened is so that I think that's
the next step what was the most
surprising thing other than the sheer
numbers of documents was I believe the
careful way in which the CIA and the FBI
tracked the event after it happened and
I think that the way in which the Lee
Harvey Oswald was tracked once they
realized that they had suffered some
missteps had not recognized that he
would be an assassin I think all of
those things I think what is not
surprising is that we didn't find the
smoking gun that is you very rarely find
a particular record who's going to tell
that's going to tell you everything you
really want to know
but you can put a lot together I also
would like to add that we had a category
of documents called enhancing the
historical understanding of the event
and we tried to put the assassination in
to a context so we opened a great many
documents on Cuba on the Cuban exiles a
group of people that have traditionally
been thought to be involved in the
assassination and we opened a great many
documents on the Mafia that the FBI had
because there another group of people
who have often been tied to the
assassination and then we even moved
into a few years of Vietnam because of
the suspicion the part of some people
that the Vietnam beginning of the
Vietnam War had something to do with the
assassination and so we really did go
into every corner but we did not make
any conclusions from Louisville Kentucky
call your own with dr. Aaron Nelson of
American University yes you made a
statement early on that certain
documents were not released to the
public and that one of the reasons that
there might be people who might I guess
be embarrassed by this and is this is
there we're going to be continuing
allegations that the the cover-ups
continued because these documents were
not released to the public embarrassment
had nothing to do with it in fact the
Central Intelligence Agency was very
happy to see us go out of existence
because we did not in fact ever worry
about embarrassment I'm thinking instead
of a person who was for example in
Mexico in an embassy who was a double
agent and whose family may very well
still be there and who could be
physically harmed that is the kind of
name that we covered we did make some
compromises on technical activities but
one of our mandates and something we did
consistently was when we took out
a word we put in a substitute it was
either a a technical meaning and
operational detail on the part of the
military was something that they still
use that was part of our statute we
couldn't reveal something that they
still use or it was a name or it was the
name of a CIA officer who had been
undercover and was in a foreign country
and had never been never said or
admitted that he was a CIA officer
because he had been undercover that's
the kind of name and we would always put
down name there were other instances
where we also had we have a little code
that goes along with the documents that
tells you what was covered but we never
covered anything for embarrassment that
was not a part of our thinking and I
have to tell you that there were five
people who came from many different
fields of history and law and never once
did we really disagree on what to open
that is none of us stood up and said no
no you can't open that the only time we
disagreed was when one of us wanted to
open more when we would discuss whether
or not the privacy interests for example
were important enough or whether this
was really a technical operation that
was going and we were warned to consider
we were warned I'd say at least once
every three weeks in the first year of
our existence that we were releasing too
much and that it was going to destroy
American foreign policy etc etc but all
that's been in the archives for three
and a half years now for and and nothing
has quite happened yep well dr. Nelson
we have a great many colors waiting but
if you could just tell us briefly you
just mentioned the other panel members
who were they well our chairman was a
judge John tunheim who joined us when he
was Deputy Attorney General of a state
of Minnesota and Kermit hall who is a
Dean at Ohio State University and a
Constitutional History
in a William Joyce who is the assistant
librarian at Princeton University in
charge of manuscripts rare books and
Henry Graff who was an emeritus
professor from Columbia University
that's four isn't it
and me and I actually teach subjects
related to American foreign policy on
our conservative life from I believe
it's Louisville when it's in Mississippi
is that correct caller that's correct
morning good morning yes I have a little
bit of history in forensics as well as
retired from the military as a military
policeman and I was in high school when
Kennedy was assassinated and I was just
wondering after all this time why hasn't
anyone come out and just flat-out said
that there is just no way that he could
have shot Kennedy from his position with
the type of rifle he had with the
accuracy that he had with the bullet
impacts that they are ascertained from
the angles you know it's just it's just
not possible unless he was Superman so
have y'all done incredible istic checks
on this the one ballistic check that we
have done and is not quite completed
although we had members of our staff
watching over the first part of the
study there is a little bullet fragment
left in the that the National Archives
has had you know box all this time and
the question was whether or not that
fragment had any kind of
a fabric attached something seemed to be
attached to it and so finally the
archives of course did not much want us
to disturb this artifact because it was
used in the Warren Commission and they
were fearful that it would be harmed but
ultimately they agreed unfortunately
they agreed very late in the game and
you will have to watch the newspaper or
the archives announcements or something
I don't myself know exactly how turned
out because we have we had we knew it
would take about until the middle
October for them to actually finish the
study we because we were not an
investigative group we didn't go very
much farther than that the single Bullet
theory came out of the Warren Commission
the House Select Committee on
assassinations in the 70s said that it
was impossible there were two had to be
two gunmen and you'd be very interested
in knowing that there is an FBI document
which says that their double agent in
Cuba heard that Fidel Castro went out to
try to to fire that many times from the
same kind of rifle and couldn't do it
and announced there had to have been
another killer at least that's what the
document says so I think that's a
controversy that will continue and we
did not find any evidence one way or
another we found no evidence of a second
killer we looked for all these things
very very hard it doesn't mean there
wasn't anyone there
but we didn't find it so you didn't come
away a conspiracy theorist
no I didn't historians tend not to be a
conspiracy theorist some of them are but
I think that we tend to see a lot of of
many facets to a an assassination or to
any event I didn't come out of it not
being a theorist I just didn't it seems
to me that one of the basic problems
tracking conspiracies is the
conspirators don't write it down and so
when you track the paper trail and or
even interview they're not going to
admit it on an interview so generally
the way you put together a conspiracy is
very tedious work in a collection of
Records and then you make up your mind
and people disagree about conspiracies
from 500 years ago so I would imagine
there will still be disagreement but I
think now you can sit there and look at
all the evidence that we have
accumulated on our liberal life from
Vidalia Louisiana good morning good
morning always puzzled me about the
assassination for President Kennedy
we've been a week or so after he was
assassinated it just so happened that my
wife my children myself were going
through Dallas on our way to Fort Worth
we stopped to see where the president
was assassinated there was a lot of
people around there looking just sites
is just like I was on the street it they
had four squares painted out squares
probably eight foot by 12 foot and then
each square was painted for instance one
eye was painted president's call for you
shot then the next one had president's
call second shot president's call laid
shot what puzzles me is I'm not the only
one that was at it that noticed this
standing in these squares you could not
see the window where eyes what was
supposed to be you had a walk way out on
this neutral ground in a building where
eyes were was you had to walk to your
right and a window they had red tape and
the outline of a man was supposed to be
holding a gun but you could not see it
from where the squares were painted on
the street
how could he shoot but he didn't see
well of course that's an issue that has
been raised also the distance from the
Book Depository window to Dealey Plaza I
know that in the years since Kennedy was
assassinated many of the trees had grown
up I can't answer your question because
I didn't see it in those years we did go
see it before we really got into
business and the assassination and and I
think everyone who goes there is struck
with another idea another facet another
view of things I was struck with the
fact that when I was on the street in
Dealey Plaza I thought the window looked
very very far away but when I got up in
the Book Depository I could see the
straight shot now whether or not he
could at that time with the growth of
the trees and the other differences I
don't know we that's an investigative
matter we had a hard time drawing a line
between investigation and that was just
not our mandate but I think that's an
interesting story
and I would imagine that other people at
the same time must have must have
wondered the same thing
Curtis Ohio your honor moderate lying
good morning good morning Michael Piper
author of final judgment a book about
the Kennedy assassination asserts that
there was a dispute between President
Kennedy and the government of Israel
over the furnishing of nuclear
technology to Israel and as I understand
it President Kennedy would not do that
in this book mr. Piper asserts the
Israeli most said of complicity in the
assassination of President Kennedy have
you found any evidence in your search we
found no evidence we found almost no
documents having to do with Israel
I think that book is one of maybe 500
that are written about the assassination
or maybe not quite that many I know that
when I first joined the group by the
board I decided to turn on the computer
and see what was around and I was
astonished at this year numbers of books
on my suggestion is that he go back and
or anyone interested in that go back and
look and see I'd have no recollection of
anything having to do with Israel but
you know we didn't see every document
many of them came to the archives all
completely open and therefore we didn't
see them so going through the database
and looking for that might prove useful
to you our next call is on the website
I'm sorry I'm sorry I'm saying the wrong
thing I'm sorry our a conservative line
from San Diego California good morning I
kind of wanted to have my first question
would be can we get some clarification
on the website where this report has
posted an address or something like that
and then my second is more of a
statement my second statement here is I
am the proud not so proud owner of an
Italian mannlicher-carcano built in 1938
my dad bought it for me in 1960 for 12
bucks it's the same weapon that was used
the same type of weapon that was used by
Lee Harvey Oswald during the middle
sixties I had fired the weapon but then
I got the chance to become a much better
shot at the request of the United States
government and got formal training on
how to shoot a gun and in 1968 was the
last time I fired that weapon and I took
it out to a dump and I had the last
damaged no ammunition left for those
types of weapon anymore unless you want
to reload it and I still have it still
packed away but I remember trying to
fire off three accurate shots the period
of time that I forgot about distance was
three or four hundred yards I tried to
make those three shots and I'll tell you
something I couldn't come within three
feet of hitting the same spot that I
shot out with first bullet with Ben was
notoriously inaccurate at the weapon was
was very clumsy had a very bad bolt
action in it in fact it was so bad that
I stopped using the weapon because many
soldiers during World War two were
killed by the weapon itself the bolt
action was so rickety that a highly
charged powder charge from one one shell
that blow the boat out of the weapon
into a stack in your head it was a very
very bad weapon I mean and there is no
the weapon that he uses in the archives
because it was part of the Warren
Commission set of documents and
artifacts and we saw it some of the men
lifted it up I didn't but I think you're
I think you're right it was probably all
Lee Harvey Oswald could afford at the
time and that is one of the greatest
controversies is whether he could have
shot that many times and hit accurately
and it's it's unanswerable in terms of
what we found I think there will always
be speculation about that the Warren
Commission started that speculation by
coming up with what they call the single
Bullet theory that is that there had
been a lone gunman and and I think that
while the House Committee disputed that
somewhat no one has ever found other
than the various theories anyone who has
come forward to say they participated in
that
so we're left with the fact that Oswald
we know Oswald did shoot whether he did
shoot all the bullets or not as a matter
of great contention with everyone
studying the way in which the president
was hit it get it can get a little
ghoulish if you really want to look at
it time and time and time again but it
has interested people greatly and I
don't have an answer to that and I'm not
so sure anybody does right now before we
take our next call is to backtrack a
minute when I was flailing to say
incoherently before was that this report
can be found at the website for the
Federation of American scientists as WWF
fas.org I apologize for my incoherence
our next call is on the liberal line
from Vallejo California good morning
good morning I see something other than
the impeachment you know hearings so
yeah I I was somebody who thought Oswald
was the only person that you know shot
the president but I don't know after
seeing all of her stones movie and I
don't know if you want to comment on
that and investigating what happened in
the Bay of Pigs and I think was the
Louisiana Attorney General that sued
that tried Clay Shaw a lot of
interesting things came up I know that
when Kennedy came into office that he
shook up a lot of people I know that he
shook up the Mafia I know Robert Kennedy
was investigating them and they had
connections with Cuba along with the
Cuban Nationals and the CIA and he was
so mad about what happened baby pigs I
know that he wanted to span the CIA
reduce military things and it just seems
to me that this one bullet theory just
just doesn't stand up and I don't know
when all the other material for the
Warren Report is going to be released
I know it's sealed until sometime after
maybe they'll shed some light but from
from everything that I can see now I
really think there was more than one
person involved in the shooting
I mean if nobody can actually duplicate
that that kind of a shot from that
window with that kind of rifle the other
thing is I don't think Boswell was a
super expert marksman either from
understand he was radar specialist in
Japan at the same base that Gary Powers
flew out of with the u2 and that whole
thing about him going to Russia and how
he got back and all that kind of goes in
to him being involved with the CIA so
I'm kind of convinced now that it's it's
a conspiracy and just kind of like to
ask you do you think that the other
information that's being under lock and
key at this point do you think it'll
shed some kind of light on that
conspiracy at that time there really
isn't any information under lock and key
except for the selected documents we
allowed to be under lock and key we
opened a Lauren report documents that
had been closed and we specifically were
told to open all of the House Select
Committee documents it took us a great
long time to do that
then and you've hit on a problem that
has caused a lot of suspicion and that
is that every time we had an
investigation of the assassination we
hid the documents that is everyone
closed the documents and so there was
always a sense that there was something
back there now as for the Louisiana
trial it was a district attorney Jim
Garrison who was the hero you might say
of Oliver Stone's movie who pursued Clay
Shaw and took him to trial only man who
has ever tried for the assassination
Shaw was astonished by the way and in
looking into that we rep see we've
received some documents from the
district attorney's office and some
grand jury documents and the some
documents from clay Shaw's lawyer and
also a diary that Clay Shaw kept
and in truth Jim Garrison and hence the
Oliver Stone movie has been discredited
by these documents Garrison if you if
you read them you see he did not have a
case he had nothing to build it on and
as you remember show I think was the
jury was out what fifteen minutes thirty
minutes something like that he simply
didn't have a case and for that reason I
think you can discard that conspiracy
now there's no question about the fact
that the Cuban exiles were very angry at
Kennedy and because he did not support
them when they were going into the Bay
of Pigs with air cover and so we
released a great many documents about
Cuba and the Cuban exiles and tried to
put a lot together for the reviewers
whether we never found a close tie but
then of course as I say you you're not
gonna find it written down the Mafia was
used we have we found that out in the
1970s from a congressional Senate
Committee the Mafia was used to approach
a Castro Castro was the subject of
attempts at assassination but it's and
while we have released all of those
documents it really will be somebody
somebody is going to have to go through
them piece by piece but I think actually
if I came out on one side or another I'd
say that I came out not really thinking
that oswald was connected to the CIA I
think we attribute too much efficiency
to these organizations I think if you if
you live around the federal government
or work in the federal government you
see that in fact they're not very
efficient I'm not quite sure how they
get together on a conspiracy and so you
know left behind the CIA in those years
barely spoke to each other
so I think that that's one of the
practical reasons why there was perhaps
not a conspiracy with in addition I
think that why you had a lot of people
who wanted to perhaps kill Kennedy
assassinating someone is not that easy
and what we hate to think of in this
country or perhaps any country is the
idea that one mentally unbalanced man
could change the course of history
whether it was by assassinating Abraham
Lincoln or way McKinley or John F
Kennedy and that's what happened
that is as the assassination changed the
course of history was bound to and so I
think we really don't like to think that
we would prefer to think that there was
some hidden conspiracy behind it there
is no record that oswald was used by the
CIA at all they had to scurry to come up
and find anything out about him if
anything they made the mistake of not
following him adequately enough when he
came back to this country on our
moderate life from Larusso missouri good
morning how are you this morning
I think you I recently saw a documentary
on one of the networks or cable whatever
it may have been on some private group
that have been investigating the
assassination I guess for some years and
OH
back in my younger days I was quite a
rifle enthusiast and in this approver
failed oh if you if I don't know that
anyone's ever noticed this or not but
you could see a bullet hit the curb on
the left side of Kennedy's car oh you
can see the powder fly up from where
that bullet hit that curb
it's very obvious right don't fulfill
now these people claim that this
assassination was set up I originally
set up by a group of the Mafia in
Chicago and that it was actually done
through the French mafia out of France
and their concern and that their reason
for doing this was at Castro of course
it nationalized Cuba and their casinos
were losing millions and millions of
dollars a day and the Castro was
slightly involved but that there were
there were actually three people
involved in the shooting and the idea
was so they could be sure that they
actually killed Kennedy that they were
going to fire a from above from the rear
above from the front which was a grassy
knoll they have it enhanced a picture
there that that pretty well shows of
guys standing back in there and the the
the other gunman was it was concealed in
a drainage deal down in the kind of
street level and he had an escape route
that went out through some of their
sewer tunnels or whatever that that it
took about 20 minutes to get away but
they they claimed that they stayed in
Dallas for about ten days in a safe
house after that after the assassination
that they left there from there they
went to Chicago from Chicago they took a
private plane to Montreal and from
Montreal back to France and I I just saw
this but you can actually see the the
concrete puff from where this was this
this one bullet actually hit the curb
across this process on the opposite side
of Kennedy's car that but there there
was a bullet that totally missed
everything and this this one fellow that
supposedly knows has all this
information is in prison in France he
was offered the contract to
do this assassination in well I think
one of the one of the things you have to
remember is that once there is a major
historical event a lot of people would
like to feel they were involved in it
and so a lot of people have come forward
I think that the whole issue of the
grassy knoll and such is something that
we will always have with us and again my
suggestion is to go look at the
documents now they're there I'm sorry
thank you so much for joining us dr.
Nelson we're just about out of time
dr. nelson of american university was a
board member who issued this one of the
members who issued this final report on
the assassination records review of John
F Kennedy we will be joining the
Congress as they convene in a weekend
session to pass some spending bills so
they have to do in the next few days
thank you very much for joining us and
we look forward to seeing you next time
on Washington Journal